What we're gonna be now chatting a bit
about, and I'll chat about it sort of
through the context of glitch for
these couple examples,
is understanding a bit more about geometry
and how these scenes are made up.
Cuz eventually, we're gonna wanna get into
to vertex shaders and fragment shaders.
But before we can understand a vertex
shader, we have to understand a little bit
more about how the pipeline works and
how vertices are declared.
And so if we go into this 3 demo geometry,
And we can just click show and
show the output next to our code.
And so the sort of framework of
this sketch is very much just
the same as our other demos.
We've got perspective camera,
orbit controls,
we have grid helper here as well.
And now we're getting into
creating a custom geometry.
And so this is a very simple,
this is like the building block for
everything we're gonna
do today is a triangle.
And so how would we do this?
Maybe I'll edit this in a remix version so
that I won't destroy or
I won't mess up the original so
I'm gonna just remix this project.
So I'm gonna start by removing
some of this stuff so
that we can start from
a sort of clean slate and
sort of build this up again from
scratch and walk it through.
So let's say I wanted to draw something
more interesting than just a sphere
because right now we're just
working with the built-in geometry.
And so,
we can't get very far with some of that,
cuz we're just working with spheres or
boxes.
And we wanna start to understand, how do
we actually manipulate these shapes and
how do we eventually
produce our own geometries?
So the first thing we're gonna do is
we're gonna say const geometry = new
THREE.Geometry, and the geometry interface
allows us to specify vertices, and
faces an end up actually creating these
shapes that are made up of triangles.
And so remember,
a quad is made up of two triangles.
A sphere is made up of many,
many triangles.
And so in order to create,
let's say a triangle,
we're gonna have to first define
a list of vertices which is an array.
And each of these vertices
is gonna be a vector THREE.
And so we're gonna say maybe the triangle
is going from -0.5 on the x and
0.5 on the y, and 0 and the z axis.
And so quite often in WebGL,
the y axis when we go up,
it's actually positive, and
when we go down it's negative.
So, it's sort of inverted to what we are
familiar with, with maybe 2D rendering or
the screen itself,
going up is actually positive quite often,
going down is negative.
And then, so
that will be the first vertex.
Another vertex will be, let's say if
we think about this as the top left,
maybe we can then place the bottom
right so it'd be 0.5 along the x,
-0.5 on the y and 0.
And by the way,
I usually don't memorize this stuff, and
you probably will never
really have to write this.
I mean,
you might have to write it occasionally,
but this is not something that you
need to really write very often.
And so it's something that I always forget
and I'm probably gonna make a mistake
here, but this is more to show
how it works under the hood.
So that you understand a little bit
more about how it all comes together,
rather than something that you're actually
gonna be using in your day to day.
You're rarely gonna need to
write triangles out manually.
But it's good to know.
So this third vertex of the triangle,
let's say would be the bottom
left triangle vertex.
So that would be -0.5 on the x,and
it would be -0.5 on the y,
I think and then 0.
And so we're not gonna see anything yet.
And that's because we haven't
defined the order of these verses.
And so right now we have a set of vector
threes, but geometry this geometry
class also needs to know how do
we connect the dots basically.
So if we imagine these
vertices on a piece of paper,
just like we're doing a connected
dots kind of game for kids.
Now we want to start with one
of the points, draw a line
connected to the other one, and then
draw a line connected to the other one,
and eventually close that
path to create a triangle.
And so in order to do that
we're gonna say geometry.faces.
We're gonna specify a new face and
so a face is a face three object.
And face three is just
a face that has three
vertices that's kind of what
it's saying or three indices.
And we specify here the index
into the vertex array,
which is a bit of a complex idea.
And already I seem to have made a mistake,
which is classic with doing
this kind of vertex stuff.
It might be in the way I have
placed these xyz coordinates, and
this is just to show how little
I actually write this manually.
But I haven't created a mesh obviously.
Well, this is probably correct so far,
but I just haven't created a mesh.
So I've got a geometry but
I'm not wrapping it in a mesh,
I'm not wrapping it with a material and
I haven't added it to the scene.
So I have to do those things.
So now we've just created a geometry
as a replacement maybe towards here
I'm just gonna create a very simple mesh,
THREE.Mesh geometry and
I'll pass in here,
maybe a mesh basic material.
And maybe this will just be the color
red or something like that.
Almost there,
haven't added to the scene yet.
So, I'm gonna add that now.
And now we have a red triangle.
One of the things you might
notice is as we spin around,
we're gonna sort of lose the triangle.
And this is an important thing
with three JS and with webGL and
just graphics programming in
general is that generally speaking,
only one side of a triangle is rendered.
And that's for performance reasons.
Because usually,
when we have a sphere, we're only
seeing the outside of the sphere.
So we're only seeing one side of those
triangles that defines the sphere, but
in this case, we actually are seeing both
sides, we wanna see both sides at least.
And so in the material,
we can say side is THREE.DoubleSides, so
now it's a double-sided material,
it will render both of these sides.
The performance implications
are very subtle.
It's really only a big deal if you have
hundreds of thousands of triangles.
But this is why it's generally
something that's default only on
the outside because typically speaking,
we're not rendering the inside faces.
And so now we have this,
we could also try different materials
we could try mesh normal material.
And all of a sudden, it's gonna be black.
And you're gonna wonder,
well, that's weird.
It works for spheres,
why does it not work for custom geometry?
There's one other little thing we
have to do, and that's we have to
automatically compute all the normals,
quote unquote for the mesh.
So normals is this information that's held
within each vertex that tells the system
where the face, or the vertex itself,
is pointing at, where it's in the world.
That's kind of a simplified
explanation of normals.
We don't need to get too,
too far into trying to wrap our
heads around normals right now.
But you will need to have this line
that is compute vertex normals.
And there's other types
of normals as well.
There's face normals and
geometries interface.
The class here allows us
to compute face normals,
but we don't need to worry too
much about that right now.
We just do compute for text normals.
And now we've built a geometry
that's just a single triangle.
And if we wanted to turn this into
a quad well we could take this and
do the same thing to build
up the opposite triangle,
that would be placed right
next to our acute triangle.
We could have three more vertices so like,
bottom left, top right, and then top left.
And then together those things
together would make up a quad.
But instead of doing another three
vertices, the whole point of doing faces
is that we can reuse vertices
to create a more complex shape.
So I'm just gonna add
one more vertex here and
that's the remaining
one to create our quad.
So it should be 0.5, 0.5,
which is the only other coordinate
that I haven't really touched on.
And then here, I'm gonna just try and
figure out, okay, based on this,
what are the indices into this array?
So right now we're saying 0, 1, 2, so
this is index 0, index 1, and index 2.
That makes up the first triangle.
The second triangle might be 0, 2, 3 or
something like that and this is sort
of where it gets a bit complicated.
It's because you have to sorta think,
okay,
based on the coordinates,
how do I draw these lines?
So you might say 0, 2, 3.
But this is, again, not something that
you're gonna be doing on a regular basis.
Or no it might be let's see,
so we have the top left is 0.
The one is the top, the bottom right, so
we're gonna say from 0 to the top right.
So it'd be 0, 3, 2, not even.
So this is where it gets, [LAUGH] messy.
Honestly, sometimes when I'm doing this, I
will just choose randomly until it works.
And it's worked for me so far.
So, like that technique
is sometimes acceptable,
[LAUGH] and that works perfect.
There's actually, once you put it down and
think about this and
you actually were to maybe sketch
these vertices out on paper.
You could actually get
the correct numbers but,
sometimes when I'm just hacking things
together, I'll just hack it together.
Because ultimately we are just
trying to show something.
But again, like I am saying we
are not really doing this typically.
More often we're just gonna
use the 3 plane geometry,
rather than actually
defining things manually.
And the nice thing is if we create
a plane geometry and we subdivide it,
then we can do plane geometry dot
vertices, or plane geometry dot faces.
And for example, if we had,
let's say we had a grid,
and we wanted to randomly
take some of the faces out.
We could just do geometry dot faces and
then maybe
faces is equal to some filter function,
filter out some of those faces randomly.
And all of a sudden we have a grid that
has some randomly faces taken out of it.